# simulate_xna_signal
simulate_xna_signal is a pip-installable python package to simulate the expected nanopore signal produced by a given genetic sequence including unnatural base pairs (XNA) from the Artificially Expanded Genetic Informatin System (AEGIS):  P, Z, B, S, J, V, K, and X, where S refers to the carbon-based S nucleotide ("Sc"). The user inputs the sequence of bases they would like to be simulated, and recieves as an output the simulated raw nanopore sequence plot for their input. The generated plot is a step function where each step corresponds to the average normalized current level generated by each base in the sequence that can be simulated. Shading bars represent a simulated standard deviation of 4%. Example outputs are provided in the 'Examples' folder. 

To use the tool, the user calls the function run(), which will prompt them to enter a genetic code as a string in the terminal by the input command 'Enter XNA sequence:'. The input is not case-sensitive, but the input sequence can not contain spaces or other symbols than the supported bases A,T,G,C,P,Z,B,S,J,V,K, and X. Reccommended sequence length is between 10 and 100 nucleotides. The user should ensure that they are working in the same folder as the experimental data .csv files to avoid errors with the functions not finding the data files. To use package use the following commands: 

import simulate_xna_signal

simulate_xna_signal.simulate_xna_signal.run()

Experimental data used to generate this model was collected by the Marchand Lab at the University of Washington and was used in the following publication: 

Kawabe, H., Thomas, C.A., Hoshika, S. et al. Enzymatic synthesis and nanopore sequencing of 12-letter supernumerary DNA. Nat Commun 14, 6820 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42406-z

this package was created as a final project for bioen537 computational systems biology, taught by professors hellerstein and sauro at the university of washington in fall 2023. 

Special thanks to the Marchand Lab for allowing use of their data for this project and to Drs Sauro and Hellerstein for their help and guidance. 
